# Working efficiently with your Inbox and your projects

The goal of using a todo list to keep track of your daily tasks is to increase your productivity, but there is an overhead involved: organising your tasks. If you leave all your tasks in one big pile, it becomes a mess that doesn't help you, but on the other hand, it also takes time to organise the tasks into projects. You do need to have some organisation of your tasks, and it is a task itself to organise the todo list.

During a busy day, there are likely to be many tasks you think of or are asked to do, and you want to put these tasks on your todo list before you forget about them, but you shouldn't necessarily take the time to organise the tasks at the same time as you add them to the list. It takes some effort to figure out where in your todo list the tasks belong, which priority the tasks have, and when you need to have them done. It takes some effort to figure these things out, and if it breaks the flow of what you are doing to figure this out, the todo list easily becomes a burden rather than boon.

What you really want to do is to add tasks as soon as you think of them but then make it a daily task to organisme them when you have the time for this. Maybe set aside half an hour or so at the end of the day, or in the morning over your coffee, to go through new tasks and organise them. In Todoist, the Inbox is there to assist you with this. Whenever you think of a new task, add it to the Inbox project and don't worry about anything else about it just yet. Instead, set some time aside each day to go through the Inbox and organise the new tasks there.

Some tasks obviously belong in certain projects. Some, obviously, have higher priorities than others. Some have deadlines that you have to meet. All that aside, though, organising tasks and adding tasks to your todo list requires different levels of mental effort. It is easy to add a task and then leave it at that, but requires more thought to organise it. If you start organising a task as soon as you think of it, you switch context from what you are doing right now to organising your future tasks, and that adds an overhead to your work that you don't need.

We suggest that you give very little thought to tasks as you add them to your list but instead spend some time on them when you are not busy with other tasks. Add everything you think of during the day, and filter the tasks later. Organise the tasks at the time you set aside for this.

## Using your Inbox

Every time you think of a task, add it to your Inbox project. Small or large, important or not, large task or small, it doesn't matter. Just add everything you can think of when you think of it. What you want to do is to offload the effort your brain uses in remembering future tasks to your todo list. If you are anything like us, you will probably have tasks running around your brain reminding you about the, regardless of how important they are, just because you don't want to forget anything that *might* be important. Well, that is what the todo list is for. As soon as you think of a task, add it to your todo list and you can stop spending brain power thinking about it.

Of course, writing down tasks doesn't mean that you have achieved them, so there is an important second step if you want to stop worrying about forgetting important tasks. You have to keep them organised and make sure that you actually accomplish them. Organising the tasks is the important second step---actually doing the tasks is a third, and much more important, step, but that will follow from organising the tasks properly.

If, every day, as soon as you think of a task, you add it to your Inbox, and then at the end of the day or next morning you go through the tasks, you separate recording your tasks from organising them, and the organisation becomes less of a burden and not something that breaks your work-flow. Record everything and don't worry about---at this time---how important or how trivial a task is. Just record it. Then, once a day, go through your Inbox and evaluate each task.

Just go through each task. The first question you want to ask yourself is whether the task really is worth doing or not. During a busy day, every task seems important, but in actuality, not all tasks are. Some, when you think about them away from the heat of the moment, can just be deleted. The are not important after all. Some, on the other hand, you still want to do, but they are not important to do right now---you don't want to forget about them, but there is not need to worry about them just yet---put those in a "later" project and look at that folder once in a while to see what is still worth keeping there, what needs to be moved to a more important place, or what can simply be deleted because it doesn't seem important any longer.

When you go through your Inbox, you will find many tasks that belong to obvious projects. Those, you can move there. But don't just move them there; take some time to think about how important they are for that project. Give the tasks a priority. Don't worry too much about the priority you give to tasks---you can always change them, after all---but a rough idea about how important a task is will help you organise a project down the line.

Some tasks do not necessarily belong to an obvious project. Those tasks are harder to organise. Since you are looking at them at your "organising time", though, you have time to think about it. You don't have to make quick decisions. Figure out which project they are more important for, or consider if they indicate that there is a new project you want to assign them to. You don't want to have too many projects---that makes organising your tasks harder---but if you find that there are tasks that keeps popping up that seems related, that is a good indication that you might want to create a new project to organise them into.

As you go through the tasks, you might want to give them all a deadline so you don't forget about them. That is not necessarily a good idea. If we record that a task should be done by tomorrow, we give it more importance tomorrow than it necessarily has. We just tend to give deadlines more importance than the actual impact of tasks for a project. Many deadlines we give for tasks at the spur of the moment are completely arbitrary anyway---don't give tasks deadlines unless they really are hard deadlines force upon you from external forces. Priorities are a better measurement of how important tasks are than deadlines are, if the deadlines are something you invent yourself, but when you give tasks a deadline you will tend to value the deadlines over the priorities.

Now, you might fear that if you don't give a task a deadline, which means they won't pop up on your Today list at any time, you will forget about them. That might be true, but if you never get to a task because there are always more important tasks---tasks with a higher priority---then you are still making the right choice whenever you decide on the next task you should be working on. This contrasts a bit with the importance of using todo lists to not forget about tasks, so you cannot completely forget about tasks. You need to get back to the tasks at some point. Just make sure you give them deadlines because the deadlines matter; not because you feel like completing them so you don't forget about them.

Unless a task actually has a hard deadline, don't assign one to it. Give it a priority and assign it to a project. You will go back to each project regularly anyway and evaluate the tasks there.

## Working with your projects

How you work with projects will be somewhat subjective. You have to evaluate regularly how important each project is to you. That will be influenced, of course, by your work---if your boss thinks a project is important, it will probably be important to you if you want to keep your job---and by your personal life---if you want to train for a Marathon, then a training project will be important to you. Regardless, projects are the highest level at which you want to organise your todo list. A high priority task in one project might be less important than a low priority task in a more important project. And how high a priority you give to a given project will vary from day to day---personal projects matter more in your time off than work projects while work projects are what you want to focus on during work hours.

A productive way to work with your todo list is to set aside time to work on individual projects rather than individual tasks. Deadlines might determine which projects you should be working on at any particular day---which is why we recommend that you don't put deadlines on tasks that are not really hard deadlines---but more often, the importance of the actual project is what drives your work any individual day. If you set aside a fixed amount of time to work on each project during a day or a week, or how long you want to plan, then you simply want to do the most important work for a given project at the time you set aside to work on that project. Use your calendar to set aside time to work on your important projects---that isn't really something you want to use a todo list to do---and at the time you have set aside for a project, use the time to work on the most important tasks in that project. That is where your priorities will come into play.

Of course, priorities change over time, so don't get too settled with the priority you give a task when you move it from your Inbox to a project. Priorities are always relative to all other tasks in a project, and once in a while you want to go through your projects to reevaluate the priorities you have assigned to your tasks. If you want to work efficiently on a project, you can't just attack one task at a time---you need to also take time to evaluate how important individual tasks really are. And you have to update those priorities regularly.

Taking time from accomplishing tasks to organise tasks might feel counterproductive, but you really don't want to spend time on working on irrelevant tasks when more important tasks are ignored. That might *feel* productive, but in the long run it isn't. To really *be* productive, you have to set time aside to evaluate the importance of your tasks from time to time. How often you want to do this depends on your projects. Projects you work on every day, you probably want to look over once a week; other projects, once a month; other projects still, once a year. It all depends on how often you decide on which next task to work on. You want to look over your projects regularly enough that you are reasonably certain that any given task you work on is actually still important for the project.

## Breaking down tasks

To work efficiently with your todo list, another important aspect is breaking down your tasks to manageable bites. Tasks such as "design a homepage", "write a report" or "implement an algorithm" might be clear enough, but they are rarely easy to get started on. When you go through your projects to evaluate the tasks in them, ask yourself this question for each of them: Is this a task I know how to get started on? If you don't see what the next step is for a given task, it probably is too abstractly defined---you want to break it down into more manacle pieces. At the very least, you want to figure out what the first step of such a task would be.

Part of keeping a project organised is breaking down tasks into manageable bits that you can attack. Ideally, you want a session working on a project to consist of picking off the next task, completing it, and then moving to the next. You cannot do this if you first have to figure out what each task actually consist of; which subtasks you have to complete to deal with the task.

It is not that important if you spend time breaking down tasks into manageable sub-tasks during the time you have set aside to work on a project or the time you have set aside for organising your project, but it is an important part of working efficiently with your todo list and you have to keep this in mind. If the tasks you put in your list are not some you know how to attack, you will feel lost when you move from one task to another. Whenever you have a difficult or abstract task, take some time to figure out how it can be split into subtasks that are more easily done.
