# Afterwords

We have now taken you through the basic features of Todoist and described how you might use this tool in your own life to increase your productivity. Of course, no software tool is a panacea and using Todoist will not automatically make you more productive, reduce your stress levels, or help you manage your many tasks. It is only a help that you can integrate into your own life if you use it in ways that work well with how you work in general.

Using a todo-list is know to offload a lot of your stress simply because you teach your brain not to worry about tasks you have written down---you know that you haven't forgotten the tasks once you have them written down---but it only works once your brain trusts you to actually return to the tasks on the todo-list. Your grain is not easy to fool, and it will be sceptical until you show it that the todo-list actually gets used. We all know how it is when the brain is overloaded by all the things it thinks it has to remember---you lie sleepless at night while all tomorrow's tasks run around in your head. If you are in this situation, you will not believe us when we tell you that simply writing down tomorrow's tasks will take half of this stress away. And there is good reasons not to believe it. Because it doesn't just happen like that. You have to trust that the tasks you write down actually are not worth worrying about until you check the list again later. Otherwise, your brain will still obsess about it while you try to sleep. You have to convince your brain that it doesn't have to worry, and that only works when you are not lying to it; when you use the todo-list as a secondary memory.

Both of us live stressful lives. Amir built a company as a student, with projects and deadlines circling around his head. He developed Todoist partly to deal with this. He now uses Todoist to run a company with more than 50 employees, spread all over the world, and has to coordinate everything remotely. Thomas worked his way up through academia, where every few years you are evaluated and either increase a level or get thrown off a cliff. In all honesty, Thomas did had to take a stress leave but got back on his feet when he started building his life around offloading his worries to a todo list---Todoist was that list---and he has since the authored eight books in a year and is back on top of the research game. We would love to claim that todo lists and Todoist got us here, but that simply isn't true. At least, it isn't the entire truth. Todoist is a tool, and you have to use the tool the right way to get the full use out of it.

Todo-lists really do help you offload a lot of worries, but you have to use them in a way that convinces your brain that they are helpful. If you write stuff down and then forget about them, your brain will not be fooled. It will still obsess about all the things you have to do tomorrow, next week, next months, and all the stuff you have to remember to pack for your next trip. It takes time before you get comfortable with todo-lists and a bit longer before your brain will trust in them; your sub-conscience, running on the reptile brain, needs a lot more evidence before it really trust you.

Todo-lists, and Todoist, will help you manage a busy and demanding life, but only if you use it consistently. If you get into the habit of putting all the tasks you think of during the day into your todo-list, your brain will eventually accept this. It will be comfortable knowing that it doesn't have to keep remembering all the things you have to do---it knows that you have a list for remembering it---and you can start using that brain power for productive things rather than remembering every little task.

No software solution will help you get more productive as if by magic. You need to integrate it into your daily life, and that takes time. We evolved with one todo-list, one piece of software only, our human brain. It takes time to convince our reptile brain to accept a new reality. But it is possible to move beyond this. It just takes time and practise.

Try out Todoist for a little bit, but don't do it half-measured. If you only use it for a few important tasks, you might find a little relief, but you will not calm down your brain's version of its own todo-list. If you want to experience the full productivity gain of using todo-lists---and the calm it brings to you when you are *not* working on projects---you have to jump into it with both legs.

Give it a shot. Try to offload all the tasks you have to do, just for one month, to Todoist. Train your brain to accept that it is no longer your primary todo-list. If you manage for one month, you are never going back.
